---
title: "The Zettelkasten interconnecting problem"
date: 2022-07-23
author: "Muhammad Radifar"
id: 20220723094001
---

# The Zettelkasten interconnecting problem

#zettelkasten #communication #problemsolving #graph #zettlr #tagging #interconnection

# Problem & Solution

So Luhmann said that communication is one of the essential feature of his note-taking system, and to achieve this in the modern world where you most likely using the digital version of Zettelkasten is that you put references/link to other notes. The problem with this is that you have to list all the note that related to this. Additionally you could create a special note as the entry point for a specific theme, which in some way, I think, resemble the tagging method.

When I give Zettlr a try, I found that hard linking is such a hassle. I mean, seriously, I have to create link for all that connection? That means I would have to try to remember/scan every related note to find the connection. I believe that we can use tag to leverage the connection of every notes and it should be reflected in the graph. The graph is one of the most important aspect in communicating with Zettelkasten, because it helps you understand your communcation partner (your Zettelkasten) faster and better. It kind of remind me of Mind Map, which helps me a lot when learning or trying to create complex thing.

# Implementation

But first thing first, of course it would be better if the graph in Zettlr has the option to show the title rather than the file name, because that is how my workflow is, I use note ID for filename for the sake of simplicity. And seeing the ID rather than the title when I hover my cursor to the node makes my graph incomprehensible.

Now lets get down to the business. I am not against the hard link, but I think there is way that we can use both the hard link and weak link (tagging) to achieve the best result. For example, I think it would be great if I could use 3-10 tag for every note, and then I use the hard link to other note when there is a really specific connection (that I can remember, or else I have to scan every potential note). Then when I open the graph what I wish to see is that the nodes are not only connected by hard link, but also weak link. And it would be more wonderful if the number of identical tag between two nodes are reflected in the width of the edge (connection) so that we can tell not only the connectivity but also the quality of the connection. As Luhmann said "Every note is just an element that only gets its quality from the network of references and back-references in the system", therefore establishing a better (yet easier) connection metric could be a good way to leverage our communication with our note-taking system in Zettlr.

