---
title: Open Babel Series - 00 Setup
---

#python #openbabel #series

# Open Babel Series - 00 Setup

Prerequisite:
- Basic Python (variable type, collection, loop, decision, and functions)
- Python virtual environment (conda/mamba) 
- Jupyter notebook/lab

## Create new environment

So first as always, start with creating new environment (preferably mamba). If you have never used mamba before and have some experience with conda then great, you can simply change every conda command with mamba and vice versa.

Create new environment for this series using this command:

```bash
mamba create -n learn-open-babel python=3.9 openbabel pandas jupyterlab rich
```

Brief explanation for the command above:
- `create -n learn-open-babel` means create new environment with the name learn-open-babel.
- `python=3.9` means we choose Python version 3.9.x for this environment.
- `pandas` is the data analysis tool that we will be using throughout the series.
- `jupyterlab` kind of like jupyter notebook, but I prefer this one because it is easier to deal with multiple file.
- `rich` this one is for aesthetic purpose, this package is awesome and make reading the output easier.

Next, activate our environment with:

```bash
mamba activate learn-open-babel
```
## Test our setup environment

### Open Babel test

First lets try and run Python by typing python and press enter, something like this should appear:

```bash
Python 3.9.12 | packaged by conda-forge | (main, Mar 24 2022, 23:25:59)    
[GCC 10.3.0] on linux  
Type "help", "copyright", "credits" or "license" for more information.  
>>>
```

Next, we will check if Open Babel library installed correctly, type the following command in your Python prompt:

```python
>>> import openbabel  
>>> openbabel.__version__  
'3.1.0'
```

Lets test this library a bit more…


### Jupyter lab test