# Modern Day Zettelkasten

#zettelkasten #note-taking

Disclaimer: This is not an expert opinion on Zettelkasten. Rather, this is merely my brain dump on Zettelkasten. I just recently learn Zettelkasten and writing about this could help me understand what Zettelkasten is, how it evolve in current digital age, how I choose my tool and how all of these shape my workflow.

## Where it all started

For so long I have been looking for a simplistic note-taking tool, from Evernote, Sublime, Notion, and so on. I can see that there are many things to consider and then as time passes by my preferences started to converge.

First, lets talk about pain points. I definitely annoyed by the fact that opening the tool is either 1) take too long, or/and 2) too many steps to open and create new note. I also dislike it when creating a simple note is such hazzle like when using Notion.

Second, lets talk about where the trend goes, as the trend goes my mind is more and more subconsciously gravitated towards them. One of the trend in note-taking is markdown. We can see that in the past decade Markdown became increasingly popular, despite of [some critiques](https://ericholscher.com/blog/2016/mar/15/dont-use-markdown-for-technical-docs/) among Documentarian. We can see that Markdown is being used to describe a software or library, used in documentation, JAMstack (e.g. Hugo, Jekyll), and… note-taking of course.

And this is why… one day I'm immediately hooked when I found Inkdrop – a Markdown-based note-taking app – video on my Youtube feed. But when I was about to give it a try, I was disappointed because it is not free.

Then I start looking for alternatives, I mean, there must be few good markdown-based note-taking tools out there right? As usual, some big names starting to show, Evernote, Notion, Dropbox paper, and so on. There are few names that I do not know but seems worth to try. I forgot most of the name, but one is seems very promising, and that is Obsidian.

"Wait a minute, aren't you going to talk about Zettelkasten in this post?" Yes, sorry about this long prequel, just wait a bit minute we're almost there. Anyway, one of the thing that I like the most from Obsidian is how simple it looks, and how simple it is to create new note and the editing experience. It is also obvious where your file is, the note structure is also appear to reflect the directory structure. If you want to back them up simply sync them with your cloud storage. I don't really like it when my notes get hidden in the cloud like in many web-based note-taking app. I got this insecure feeling that my file is not within reach, and I can not see the internal structure of it. Also this kind of set up prone to vendor locking, which is sucks.

From there, I was wondering if there is an (even better) alternative for Obsidian. What is so funny is that, there is one name that (from what I remember) seems to never appear when I'm looking for markdown-based note-taking tool, and yet it keeps coming up when I am looking for alternative for Obsidian. And that is Zettlr. After using both for a while, I decided to use Zettlr.

## Why I use Zettlr

First of all, let me tell you, Obsidian is awesome. Some of its awesome feature are linking and backlink, creating graph based on how notes are interconnected. It claims that it works like your second (or should I say external?) brain which could help you discover new insights through their interconnection and pattern finding. But after using it for a while I'm starting to feel some dragging force, which probably accounted from its feature richness and somewhat unintuitive UI/UX for me. Its default editor and font style is somehow makes it look more complicated than it should be.

When I am looking at Zettlr, it feels so natural and simple. It feels like there is no distraction. But what is so funny is that after looking for many Zettelkasten video, I always found that Obsidian looks awesome with its many plugins. Trust me, there are lots of time when I was about to return to Obsidian 😆, yet I keep using Zettlr. The reason for this is as I stated before, I need something simple, natural, thus I can write with the least amount of distraction. I do not know about you, but I gets easily annoyed by many small distraction. Which is the same reason why I am returning from PyCharm back to VS Code as my IDE.

Like Obsidian, its note structure reflect the directory structure. You can even load multiple directory or project at the same window which is lovely, from what I remembered Obsidian can only load one vault at a time CMIIW.

After learning to use Zettlr for a while, I begin to realize that this note-taking app is originally designed as a tool to implement Zettelkasten, hence the name.

## Zettel what?

So what is Zettelkasten (Germany for slip-box) anyway? It is an awesome note-taking method developed by Deutsch sociologist, Niklas Luhmann. Well according to Wikipedia page it actually got a long history before him, but lets jump to the time when Luhmann used Zettelkasten as his note-taking method.

> As a result of extensive work with this technique a kind of secondary memory will arise, an alter ego with who we can constantly communicate. It proves to be similar to our own memory in that it does not have a thoroughly constructed order of its entirety, not hierarchy, and most certainly no linear structure like a book. Just because of this, it gets its own life, independent of its author. (Niklas Luhmann)

Luhmann is definitely ahead of his time. You see, it is clear to me that he already created Jarvis in a completely manual fashion, which is insane to me.

TODO: read Luhmann essay on Zettelkasten

## The evolution of Zettelkasten in Digital Age
content: image, table, mindmap, etc.

## Conclusion