# Communicating with Slip Boxes - Summary

#zettelkasten #niklasluhmann #deepthinking #communication

by Niklas Luhmann
source: http://luhmann.surge.sh/communicating-with-slip-boxes

## Slip boxes as partners of communication

- Slip boxes can be recommended as partners of communication (**Jarvis?**)
- It is **impossible** to think **without writing**; at least it is impossible in any sophisticated or networked fashion.

> Somehow we must mark differences, and capture distinctions which are either implicitly or explicitly contained in concepts. Only if we have secured in this way the constancy of the schema that produces information, can the consistency of the subsequent processes of processing information be guaranteed. And if one has to write anyway, it is useful to take advantage of this activity in order to create in the system of notes a competent partner o communication.

## Technical aspect of slip boxes

> For the inner life of the card index, for the arrangement of notes or its mental history, it is most important that we decide against the systematic ordering in accordance with topics and sub-topics and **choose instead a firm fixed place** (_Stellordnung_). A system based on content, like the outline of a book) would mean that we make a decision that would bind us to a certain order for decades in advance! This necessarily **leads very quickly to problems of placement,** if we consider the system of communication and ourselves as capable of development.

> The fixed filing place needs no system. It is sufficient that we give every slip a number which is **easily seen** (in or case on the left of the first line) and that **we never change this number and thus the fixed place of the slip**. This decision about structure is that **reduction of the complexity of possible arrangements**, which **makes possible the creation of high complexity** in the card file and thus **makes possible its ability to communicate** in the first place.

The advantage of fixed numbers:
1. The possibility of arbitrary internal branching
    branching → internal growth
    disadvantage → originally continuous text is often broken up by hundreds of intermediate slips.
2. Possibility of linking
    solve the problem of multiple storage
    link, backlink
3. Register
    Register keyword for findability
    bibliographic note

Ultimate goal: secondary memory (or brain), an alter ego with who we can constantly communicate.

> Some things will get lost (_versickern_), some notes we will never see again. On the other hand, there will be preferred centers, formation of lumps and regions with which we will work more often than with others. There will be complexes of ideas that are conceived at large, but which will never be completed; **there will be incidental ideas which started as links from secondary passages and which are continuously enriched and expand so that they will tend increasingly to dominate system**. To sum up: this technique guarantees that its order which is merely formal does not become a hindrance but adapts to the conceptual development.

> Similarly as epistemology has given up the idea that there are “privileged representations” that allow us to control the truth value of other representations or claims, **we must give up the idea** in preparing a card index that **there should be privileged places or slips that have a special quality of guaranteeing knowledge**. Every note is only an element which **receives its quality only from the network of links and back-links within the system**. A note that is **not connected to this network will get lost in the card file and ill be forgotten by it**. Its rediscovery depends on accidents and on the vagary that this rediscovery means something at the time it is found.

## Leveraging communication

> To educate partner in communication → Give independence from the beginning. The slip-box arrangement mentioned above resulting combination of order and disorder → allow great independence.

> In any case, communication becomes more fruitful when we _succeed to activate the internal network of links at the occasion of writing notes or making queries._ Memory does not function as the sum of point by point accesses, but rather utilizes internal relationships and becomes fruitful only at this level of the reduction of its own complexity. In this way, more information becomes available at this isolated moment of an search impulse than one had in mind. There is also more information than was ever stored in the form of notes, **The slip box provides combinatorial possibilities** which were never planned, never preconceived, or conceived in this way. This effect of innovation is based on the one hand on the circumstance that **the query provokes possibilities of making relations which could not be traced prior to it.**

> The communication with the slip box becomes fruitful only at a high level of generalization, namely that of establishing communicative relations of relations. And it becomes productive only at the moment of evaluation, and is thus bound to a certain time and is to a high degree accidental.

## Accidental, Serendipity, and Communication
