# Communicating with Slip Boxes - Translation

#zettelkasten #niklasluhmann #deepthinking #communication #translation

by Niklas Luhmann

Communication with note boxes

A field report 


I.

The following is a piece of empirical social research. It affects me and someone else: my Zettelkasten. It is clear that in this case the usual methods of empirical social research fail. Nevertheless, it is empirical, because the case really exists. And it's research because, I hope, you can generalize; and this, although one of the participants, no: both participants, carry out the generalization on themselves.

For generalizing research that can also be applied to other cases, one needs problems, concepts and, where possible, theories. It is natural for us (me and my Zettelkasten) to think of systems theory. In any case, it is assumed. Nevertheless, we choose a communication-theoretical approach for the presentation here. Because: that we think of ourselves as systems will not surprise anyone. But communication, or even successful communication? Does one listen to the other? That needs explanation.

The fact that Zettelkasten can be recommended as a communication partner has a simple reason in the technical-economic problems of scientific work. One cannot think without writing; at least not in a sophisticated, connectable way. Somehow one has to mark differences, capture distinctions either explicitly or implicitly in concepts; only the constancy of the scheme that generates information, which is secured in this way, guarantees the cohesion of the subsequent information processing processes. But if you have to write anyway, it makes sense to use this activity at the same time in order to create a competent communication partner in the system of notes.

One of the elementary prerequisites for communication is that the partners can surprise each other. Only in this way is it possible to generate information in the other. Information is an intrasystemic event. It arises when you compare a message, an entry, with regard to other possibilities. Information therefore only arises in systems that have a comparison schema (and be it only the schema: this or something else). For communication it is not necessary that both partners use the same comparison scheme; the element of surprise even increases when this is not the case and one regards it as a coincidence that a message means something or is even useful against a horizon of other possibilities. In other words: the "variety" in the communicating system increases, even if the case can arise that the partners communicate successfully (i.e. useful for one of the partners) despite different comparative aspects. This requires the building of chance into the system - chance in in the sense that it is not already ensured by the agreement of the comparison schemes that the information conveyed by the communication is correct, but that this arises "due to" the communication or not.

If a communication system is to hold together over a long period of time, either the path of highly technical specialization or the path of incorporation of chance and ad hoc generated information must be chosen. Transferred to collections of notes: One can choose the path of a thematic specialization (e.g. notes on state liability law) or the path of an open system. We have opted for the latter alternative, and after 6 years of successful, only occasionally difficult cooperation, we can confirm the success - or at least: the feasibility of this path.

Of course, the path of a long-term, open, thematically unlimited (only self-limiting) communication system places certain structural demands on the partners. With the currently still high level of trust in human abilities, I will be trusted to be able to fulfill these requirements. But the note box? How must the slip box be laid out so that it acquires the appropriate communicative competence?

This question cannot be answered here deductively, not from an overview of all possibilities and not by selecting the best ones. We remain on the empirical ground and only give a theory-saturated description.


II.

The technical equipment of the Zettelkasten includes wooden boxes with compartments that can be pulled out to the front and notes in octave format. These slips of paper should only be written on one side so that one can read from the front when searching without taking out the slip. This doubles the space requirement (but not quite, because not all notes would also be written on the back); and this is not without its problems, since after a few decades of use the crate system can become so large that it can no longer be easily operated from a seat. To counteract this, it is advisable to do without index cards and to use paper.

However, these are externals that only concern convenience and not performance. For the interior of the Zettelkasten, for the arrangement of the notes, for one's intellectual life, it is crucial that one decides against a systematic arrangement according to themes and sub-themes and instead opts for a fixed arrangement. A system of content (like a book outline) would mean that one commits once and for all (decades in advance!) to a certain sequence. If one considers the communication system and oneself to be capable of development, this must very quickly lead to insolvable problems of classification. The fixed order does not need a factual order. All you have to do is give each piece of paper a number, attach it in a clearly visible place (top left in our case) and never change this number and thus the location. This structural decision is the reduction in the complexity of possible arrangements that makes it possible to build up a high level of complexity in the card box and thus its ability to communicate.

Fixed numbering with abstraction from a content-related ordering of the overall structure has a number of advantages which, taken together, enable a higher type of ordering to be achieved. Such advantages are:

(1) _Arbitrary inner branching ability_. You don't need to add additional notes at the end, you can add them anywhere, even to individual words in the middle of the running text. A note with the number 57/1 can then be continued in the running text via 57/13 etc., but can at the same time be supplemented with 57/1a from a certain word or thought, continuously via 57/1b etc.; internally 57/1a1 etc. can then be connected again. On the note itself, I use red letters or numbers to mark the connection point. There can be several connection points on a ticket. In this way, a kind of inward growth is possible, depending on the ideas that arise, without systematic pre-programming and without being bound to sequential linearity. The downside is: the original running text is often broken up by hundreds of slips of paper; but if one handles the numbering systematically, the original context of the text can easily be found again.

() _Referral Options_. Since all slips have fixed numbers, you can put any number of references on slips of paper. Central concepts can be covered with a heap of references that indicate in which other contexts something belonging to them is recorded. With cross-references, the problem of multiple storage can be solved without too much work and paperwork. With this technique, it is less important where a new note is placed. If there are several possibilities, the problem can be solved at will and capture the connection through references. The work situation from which one decides to make a note often suggests a multitude of references to what already exists, especially if the slip case is already large. It is then important to keep the connection radiant, so to speak, but also with cross-references at the places indicated, to be noted immediately.

(3) _Registers_. In the absence of a systematic arrangement, one has to regulate the process of finding entries again, because one cannot rely on one's number memory here. (Although the alternation of numbers and letters in the numbering of notes is a memory aid and also a visual aid when looking for notes, it is of course not enough). A key word register is therefore necessary, which is continuously updated. Here, too, the numbering of the individual slips of paper is indispensable. A parallel working tool can be linked to the bibliographic apparatus. Bibliographic notes extracted from the literature should be recorded within the slip box. Books, essays, etc. that you have actually read belong in a special box with a special note with bibliographical information. You can then not only find out after a long time what you actually read and what you only wrote down as a precaution; but the bibliographic notes also offer the opportunity to add reference numbers that record where notes related to or inspired by that work have been made. This proves to be helpful, because one's own memory - others will feel the same way as me - works only partly with keywords and partly with author names.

As a result of prolonged work with this technique, a kind of second memory emerges, an alter ego with which one can constantly communicate. Similar to one's own memory in this respect, it has no thoroughly constructed overall order, no hierarchy and certainly no linear structure like a book. It is precisely because of this that it acquires a life of its own independent of its author. The entirety of the notes can only be described as disorder, but still as disorder with an internal structure that is not arbitrary. Some things seep away, some notes will never be seen again. On the other hand, there are preferred centres, clusters and regions that are worked with more often than others. There are large projected complexes of ideas that are never carried out; and there are side ideas that gradually accumulate and bloat; which, attached to a subordinate passage, tend more and more to dominate the system. To sum up: This technique ensures that the order - after all, it is only formal - does not become a chain, but rather adapts to the development of ideas.

Just as one has to give up the idea in epistemology that there are "privileged ideas" from which the truth value of other ideas or statements can be checked, one must also give up the idea when creating a slip box that there are privileged places, slips of paper special quality that guarantees knowledge. Every note is just an element that only gets its quality from the network of references and back-references in the system. A note that is not connected to this network gets lost in the Zettelkasten and is forgotten by the Zettelkasten. Your rediscovery is dependent on coincidences and also on the fact that this rediscovery means something by chance at the moment of the incident.


III.

If you want to raise a communication partner, it is good to equip him with independence from the outset. A Zettelkasten, which is created according to the given instructions, can achieve a high level of independence. There may be other equifinal ways to achieve this goal. The described reduction to a fixed, but only formal arrangement and the corresponding combination of order and disorder is at least one of them.

Of course, independence requires a minimum of intrinsic complexity. The Zettelkasten needs a few years to gain enough critical mass. Until then, it only functions as a container from which to retrieve what is put into it. This changes with increasing size and complexity. On the one hand, the number of accesses and query options is increasing. It becomes a universal instrument. Almost anything can be accommodated, not just ad hoc and isolated, but with internal connectivity. It becomes a sensitive system that responds internally to all sorts of ideas, as long as they can only be noted. One wonders, for example, why on the one hand the museums are empty and on the other hand the Monet, Picasso, Medici exhibitions are overcrowded; the Zettelkasten accepts this question from the point of view of the preference for temporary things. Of course, the connections available internally are selective, as this example is intended to show. In addition, since a system boundary between the person making the entry and the list box has to be crossed, they are in the realm of the non-self-evident. A new entry can of course also isolate itself — for example under the keyword Picasso for the Picasso exhibition. On the other hand, if you are looking for communication with the Zettelkasten, you have to look for internal connections that yield the unexpected (information). One can try to generalize the experiences in Paris, Florence, New York under general terms like art or exhibition or crowd (interactionist) or crowd or freedom or education and see if the Zettelkasten reacts. It is usually more fruitful to look for problems that relate the heterogeneous to one another.

In any case, communication gains in fruitfulness if the internal network of references can be put into operation on the occasion of entries or queries. Even a memory does not work as a sum of point-by-point accesses, but uses internal relations and only becomes fruitful on this level of reduction of its own complexity. In this way - quite selectively, at this moment, on the occasion of a search impulse - more information becomes available than one had in mind when making the inquiry; and above all, more information than had ever been stored in the form of notes. For given occasions, the Zettelkasten provides combinatorial possibilities that were never planned, never conceived, never conceived. On the one hand, this innovation effect is based on the fact that the query can provoke possibilities for relating that have not yet been pursued; on the other hand, however, that it encounters internal selection horizons and comparison options that are not identical to its own search scheme. 

In contrast to this structure, which provides updatable linking possibilities, the meaning of what is specifically noted recedes. Much of it quickly becomes unusable or remains unusable given the occasion. This applies both to excerpts, which are only worthwhile in the case of particularly concise formulations, and to personal reflections. Scientific publications are not created, at least in my experience, by copying what has already been put down in the slip case for this purpose. Communication with the Zettelkasten only becomes fruitful on higher generalized levels, namely on the level of communicative relating of relations. And it only becomes productive at the moment of evaluation, i.e. time-bound and largely random.


IV.

One may wonder whether the results of such communication are also random products. However, that would be an oversimplified assumption. Within the philosophy of science, the position of chance is disputed. If one follows models of evolutionary theory, chance plays an almost leading role. Nothing works without him, at least nothing progresses. Without variation in the given body of thought, there is no possibility of testing and selecting innovations. The actual problem thus shifts to the generation of coincidences with sufficiently concentrated chances for selection. As we know from the analysis of mutation processes in the field of organic evolution, mutations are complex, finely regulated processes and only have the kind of stability that is a prerequisite for selective probation if they are pre-selected at their level. They are accidental in the sense that they are not attuned to the factors that select; but they are nevertheless conditioned in their turn by complex orders.

The parallel should not be exaggerated; but one will not go wrong with the supposition that also in the social sphere and especially also in the sphere of scientific research order only arises from combinations of order and disorder. With this information about the origin, the test conditions are not invalidated, rather they are actually put into effect. In contrast to the old distinction between genesis and validity, however, it is now assumed that isolating these two aspects from one another is neither possible nor methodologically sensible; because even the generation of random stimuli requires organization, if only to meet the requirements in terms of speed, frequency, and probability of success that must be made in a dynamic society.

On this abstract level of scientific theory-oriented and at the same time empirical research, communication with slip boxes is certainly just one of many possibilities. The coincidences of reading play a role, as do misunderstandings caused by interdisciplinary movements of thought. Last but not least, from a very traditional point of view, the "unit of research and teaching" is a friction front with random-generating effects. That communication with slip boxes can also be considered as a functional equivalent and that, compared to the other options, it has many advantages, such as information compression , speed and mutual compliance, we can confirm.