---
title: "Networking 101, chapter 3 - Building Blocks of UDP"
date: 2022-07-26
author: "Muhammad Radifar"
id: 20220726074339
---

# Networking 101, chapter 3 - Building Blocks of UDP

#book #summary #networking #udp

UDP added to the core network protocol suite in August 1980 by Jon Postel. UDP referred to as a _null protocol_,

**Datagram**
> A self-contained, independent entity of data carrying sufficient information to be routed from the source to the destination nodes without reliance on earlier exchanges between the nodes and the transporting network.

- no delivery guarantees
- no failure notifications

Most well-known use: DNS.
Web Real-Time Communication (WebRTC) standards → enabling real-time communication, such as voice and video calling.

## Null Protocol Services

IP located one layer below both TCP and UDP. The IP layer provides no guarantees about message delivery or notifications of failure and hence directly exposes the unreliability of the underlying network to the layers above it. If a routing node along the way drops the IP packet due to congestion, high load, or for other reasons, then it is the responsibility of a protocol above IP to detect it, recover, and retransmit the data—that is, if that is the desired behavior!

The UDP protocol encapsulates user messages into its own packet structure ([Figure 3-2](https://hpbn.co/building-blocks-of-udp/#udp-header)), which adds only four additional fields: 
1. source port,
2. destination port,
3. length of packet, and
4. checksum.

Thus, when IP delivers the packet to the destination host, the host is able to unwrap the UDP packet, identify the target application by the destination port, and deliver the message. Nothing more, nothing less.

_No guarantee of message delivery_
> No acknowledgments, retransmissions, or timeouts

_No guarantee of order of delivery_
> No packet sequence numbers, no reordering, no head-of-line blocking

_No connection state tracking_
> No connection establishment or teardown state machines

_No congestion control_
> No built-in client or network feedback mechanisms

UDP is a simple, stateless protocol, suitable for bootstrapping other application protocols on top: virtually all of the protocol design decisions are left to the application above it.

## UDP and Network Address Translators

IPv4 address → 32 bits long → max 4.29 billion unique IP address → NAT 1994.
NAT devices at the edge of the network, each of which would be responsible for maintaining a **table mapping** of local IP and port tuples to one or more globally unique (public) IP and port tuples. The local IP address space behind the translator could then be reused among many different networks, thus solving the address depletion problem.

Not only did the NAT devices resolve the immediate problem, but they also quickly became a ubiquitous component of many corporate and home proxies and routers, security appliances, firewalls, and dozens of other hardware and software devices. NAT middleboxes are no longer a temporary solution; rather, they have become an ossified part of the Internet infrastructure.

### Connection-State Timeouts

The issue with NAT translation, at least as far as UDP is concerned, is precisely **the routing table that it must maintain to deliver the datagrams**. NAT middleboxes rely on connection state, whereas UDP has none ⇒ fundamental mismatch and a source of many problems for delivering UDP datagrams. Further it is now not uncommon for a client to be behind many layers of NATs, which only complicates matters further.

Delivering outbound UDP traffic does not require any extra work, **but routing a reply requires that we have an entry in the translation table**, which will tell us the IP and port of the local destination host. **Thus, translators have to keep state about each UDP flow, which itself is stateless.**

Even worse, the translator is also tasked with figuring out **when to drop the translation record**, but since UDP has no connection termination sequence, either peer could just stop transmitting datagrams at any point without notice. To address this, **UDP routing records are expired on a timer**. How often? There is no definitive answer; instead the timeout depends on the vendor, make, version, and configuration of the translator. Consequently, one of the de facto **best practices for long-running sessions over UDP is to introduce bidirectional keepalive packets to periodically reset the timers for the translation records in all the NAT devices along the path.**

### NAT Traversal

Unpredictable connection state handling is a serious issue created by NATs, but an even larger problem for many applications is the inability to establish a UDP connection at all.

if the client communicates its private IP address as part of its application data with a peer outside of its private network, then the connection will inevitably fail. Hence, the promise of "transparent" translation is no longer true, and the application must first discover its public IP address if it needs to share it with a peer outside its private network.

However, knowing the public IP is also not sufficient to successfully transmit with UDP. **Any packet that arrives at the public IP of a NAT device must also have a destination port and an entry in the NAT table that can translate it to an internal destination host IP and port tuple.** If this entry does not exist, which is the most likely case if someone simply tries to transmit data from the public network, then the packet is **simply dropped** ([Figure 3-4](https://hpbn.co/building-blocks-of-udp/#nat-firewall)). The NAT device acts as a **simple packet filter** since it has no way to automatically determine the internal route, unless explicitly configured by the user through a port-forwarding or similar mechanism.

It is important to note that the preceding behavior is not an issue for client applications, which begin their interaction from the internal network and in the process establish the necessary translation records along the path. **However, handling inbound connections** (acting as a server) from P2P applications such as VoIP, game consoles, file sharing, and so on, in the presence of a NAT, is where we will immediately run into this problem. ⇒ To work around this mismatch in UDP and NATs, various traversal techniques (TURN, STUN, ICE) have to be used to establish end-to-end connectivity between the UDP peers on both sides.

### STUN, TURN, and ICE

Session Traversal Utilities for NAT (STUN) is a protocol (RFC 5389) that allows the host application to **discover the presence of a NAT on the network**, and when present to obtain the allocated public IP and port tuple for the current connection ([Figure 3-5](https://hpbn.co/building-blocks-of-udp/#stun)). To do so, the protocol requires assistance from a well-known, third-party **STUN server that must reside on the public network**.

However, in practice, STUN is not sufficient to deal with all NAT topologies and network configurations. Further, unfortunately, in some cases UDP may be blocked altogether by a firewall or some other network appliance—not an uncommon scenario for many enterprise networks. To address this issue, whenever STUN fails, we can use the Traversal Using Relays around NAT (TURN) protocol (RFC 5766) as a fallback, which can run over UDP and switch to TCP if all else fails.

The key word in TURN is, of course, "relays." The protocol relies on the presence and availability of a public relay ([Figure 3-6](https://hpbn.co/building-blocks-of-udp/#turn)) to shuttle the data between the peers.

Building an effective NAT traversal solution is not for the faint of heart. Thankfully, we can lean on Interactive Connectivity Establishment (ICE) protocol (RFC 5245) to help with this task. **ICE is a protocol, and a set of methods, that seek to establish the most efficient tunnel between the participants** ([Figure 3-7](https://hpbn.co/building-blocks-of-udp/#ice)): direct connection where possible, leveraging STUN negotiation where needed, and finally fallback to TURN if all else fails.

## Optimizing for UDP

UDP is a simple and a commonly used protocol for bootstrapping new transport protocols. In fact, the primary feature of UDP is all the features it omits: no connection state, handshakes, retransmissions, reassembly, reordering, congestion control, congestion avoidance, flow control, or even optional error checking. However, the flexibility that this minimal message-oriented transport layer affords is also a liability for the implementer. Your application will likely have to reimplement some, or many, of these features from scratch, and each must be designed to play well with other peers and protocols on the network.