# Part I - Chapter I - The JAMStack and Hugo

#jamstack #hugo

- Website requires high maintenance, and many people involved.
- Jamstack → low maintenance → coined by Matt Biilmann CEO of Netlify in 2016.
- Rather than database, content is processed when deploying the website → some distributed via CDN for faster load
- API provide dynamic content, maintained/hosted by third parties. → Lower maintenance and security handled by other
- Hugo takes website template and content in markup format → converted to HTML and ready to be deployed.

## The stack in Jamstack

- Jamstack provides a way to prebuilt most of the website component then add client-side scripting to add dinamicity.
- Jamstack do not prohibit server-side or client-side scripting, rather only use them when really necessary → 
    - Precomputation when deploying is much cheaper
    - Less security issues
    - Less maintenance

## How does Jamstack work? And what is JAM in Jamstack?

- Jamstack-based website:
    - store content in markup documents instead of database
    - unlike a cell in a database, a markup document allow for viewing and editing with simple text editor.
    - developer maintain the templates and business logic → combine the data and create the website.
    - These files can be managed in version control.
        `This is the M (markup) in Jamstack`
    
    - when website builder (Hugo) compile the website, the builder can communicate with both external and
        internal services via APIs to fetch the data to compile into the website.
        `This is the A (API) in Jamstack`
    - For dynamic data, JavaScript code can take over.
        `This is the J (JavaScript) in Jamstack`

## Why use Jamstack?

1. Minimal operations
    - content is prebuilt before publication → the number of moving parts in a site is reduced.
    - Service provider takes care of security updates, hardware failures, and network failures.
    - No need to think of servers, scaling, load balancing, uptime across continents, or any other operational overhead.
    - Developer → can focus on the joy of building, Business → can focus on its core competency rather than setting up a DevOps team.
2. Great performance
    - every file cached and served from a server geographically close to the end user.
3. Lower cost
    - no need for database or application servers
    - operations becoming automatic → much less DevOps requirements
4. Developer productivity
    - can be easily run (or tested) on local machine
    - can be deployed by a simple push many times a day
    - All these give the developer more time and flexibility to focus on the content
5. Longevity
    - Based on HTML/CSS → most stable technology built
6. Tooling
    - One click deployment is readily available
    - No complicated config for security or performance
    - no extra management overhead for different layers in the stack
    - no IDE

## When not to use Jamstack

1. When there is dynamic data with no historical significance
    - dashboard with ever-changing data
    - sensor-based data
2. Building based on user-generated content with transient data
    - the home/feed of Twitter or Facebook
3. Having user-specific web pages
    - Something that require to log in, and the page appear personalized to that user
4. When there is no data to compile
    - document editor (Google docs)

## Selecting the Builder

Jekyll (Ruby), Hugo (Go)

based on popular JS framework: Gatsby, Nuxt, Next.js (These force you to follow their choices of how to write and use JS)
Pelican (Python) mdBook (Rust)

## Why choose Hugo?
Hugo is for users who don't mind getting their hands into the code and for those who need to have a life outside of their project.

1. Fast
    - Fastest feature-rich static site builder available
    - Waiting for compilation or refreshes is a significant reason for developer frustration → can mean a project's death if it's a hobby.
    - A Hugo-based website's **facelift or rewrite is easier and more enjoyable** than with any slower framework.
2. Stable
    - core features → have been supported for a long time and are not likely to break.
    - In the early days of Hugo, development moved slowly as the team focused on getting the architecture right.
    - Hugo is flexible and extensive to new features, and most releases do not break the thousands of websites built with it.
3. Built for performance
    - There is a lot of advice on improving your website's performance in easy-to-do steps in the community forums.
    - If you find a random script from the internet for doing something with Hugo, there is a high likelihood that its author has optimized it for performance.
4. Self-contained
    - no _plugin rot_
    - The core team has standardized optimal approaches to perform tasks that are available natively.
5. Single file
    - packages all its core dependencies and resources in to a single executable file.
    - stark contrast to JS-based static site builders which have hundreds of dependencies, each of which might need to be vetted by a security team for usage in an enterprise environment.
6. Extremely low maintenance
    - fewer moving parts (plugins and OS dependencies)
    - tiny installation footprint
    - no database
    - no complicated hosting steps
7. Save you from analysis paralysis
    - opinionated and built with a lot of techniques to get up and running quickly.
    - while the powerful template system allows → custom solution to problem. The Hugo team has already solved the most common ones.
    - Hugo has generic implementation for
        - pagination
        - categorizing content into unlimited types of categories
        - core website elements like menus
    - Getting up and running is easy with Hugo because there is a well-documented and widespread approach to solving most problems readily available.
8. Powerful
    - The Go template language that Hugo extends is powerful and flexible
    - Even if you write terrible code, the core performance of the built-in functions ensures a relatively good performance
    - Hugo provides good support for interacting with APIs and JS → provide extensibility and dinamicity where needed.
9. Scalable
10. Community project

## Is speed really important?

Speed frees the developer from the burden of waiting for the build to complete after every small change.

## What can we build with Hugo?

Hugo shines when information flows from the server to the client, then the users can focus on consumption rather than creation. This approach fits the traditional definition of publishing, where content creators provide content via a medium like the web to consumers.
1. Personal websites and blogs
2. Nontechnology business websites
3. Documentation websites
4. Hybrid Jamstack-based websites

## Cases that don't map to Hugo

## How to be successful with Hugo and this book
